What is meditation? Meditation is like exercise. There are a bunch of different ways to do it such as being mindful focusing on the breath, sounds, scanning your body, and many more. I experimented with all listed above, but I primarily stuck with mindfulness by focusing on my breath and observing my thoughts. I started with five minutes in the morning and night slowly increasing to 10 minutes as the days went on.


At first meditation was a challenging practice. I noticed my thoughts pulling at the focus of my breath. Something that helped me at the beginning was to play guided meditations to get me in the habit. After rummaging through many different guided meditations, I started to stray off of them and use zen meditation music in the background which I enjoyed a lot more. Switching off guided meditations allowed my brain to think (or not think) on its own. I was able to observe my thoughts more clearly and notice what my brain was distracted by then bring myself back to my breath. I never began a practice with the intention of trying to gain the perceived benefits of meditation. Instead my intention was to develop a deeper trust within myself and become more focused and mindful throughout my day. Some benefits I noticed were a heightened awareness, focus, and calm. I want to emphasize it is NOT a magic pill, it is just like exercise, but for your brain. The benefits just came. 


I intricately noticed an increase in awareness. I started to become aware of and more grateful for the life I have been blessed with. Along with a better understanding of others.  I am always on the go doing something and meditation allows my brain to slow down and realize the spiritual abundance of life.


An increased focus on the task at hand. Like many people, I love thinking, planning, and talking about the future, which is important unless you’re not improving in the present. After the planning was done I was able to bring a deeper focus to my gymnastics and school. 


Meditation keeps you unfazed by the chaos. One day I was driving to practice as a normal day. On the way to the gym I was listening to a podcast and out of nowhere BANG! My coffee flew everywhere and I looked up and I saw a 1959 Mustang (completely totaled) rear ended me. This was my first (hopefully last) time I had  been in a car incident and I was completely calm the entire time. When I was reflecting while waiting for the cops to come I believe my meditation had some to do with my reaction. This is just one example but I'm starting to notice that I don’t get affected by things outside of my control as much.


Is this all placebo effect? Maybe. But I don’t believe so. Let's look at science.


This MRI study was an 8-week mindfulness practice measuring the relationship between their perceived stress scale (PSS) and changes in the amygdala. They took pre and post MRI scans to test the results and asked participants what their PSS was before and after the study. Fast forward to the results, participants' PSS scores decreased from 20.7 to 15.2 and as hypothesized their amygdala shrinked! The more their PSS scores changed the bigger the change was in their amygdala. This is a notable difference because the amygdala is salient for stress, anxiety, and fear. But wait there’s more. In another study (all studies will be linked below) there was not only a decrease in gray matter density in the amygdala, but an increase in gray matter in the hippocampus. This is huge because the hippocampus is essential for memory formation, spatial awareness, and emotional regulation. 


That is awesome. Now we know how mindfulness is beneficial. Let's look at why this happens.


According to a Stanford article, Lumba-Brown says, brain waves shift from faster waves which are linked to stress to slower and more relaxed waves which are tied to calm, deep focus, and sleep. Essentially, this activates your parasympathetic nervous system which regulates relaxation and recovery. Also, two network pathways switch from default mode which is thinking about everything other than the present (stress) to flipping on insula which is responsible for awareness. 


Overall, I enjoy mediation. It is all about consistency and investing in yourself. Give it a try!


“Quiet the mind, and the soul will speak.” -Ma Jaya Sati Bhagavati






Sources: 


https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2840837/


https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3004979/#S7


https://stanfordmag.org/contents/what-happens-when-you-meditate#:~:text=Faster%20brain%20waves%20are%20linked,%2C%20deep%20focus%2C%20and%20sleep.